Title: Comparison of Cox regression and generalized Cox regression models to machine learning in predicting survival of children with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma

Abstract:
The incidence of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in children is increasing globally. Due to the immature immune system in children, the prognosis of DLBCL is quite different from that of adults. We aim to use the multicenter large retrospective analysis for prognosis study of the disease.
For our retrospective analysis, we retrieved data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) database that included 836 DLBCL patients under 18 years old who were treated at 22 central institutions between 2000 and 2019. The patients were randomly divided into a modeling group and a validation group based on the ratio of 7:3. Cox stepwise regression, generalized Cox regression and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) were used to screen all variables. The selected prognostic variables were used to construct a nomogram through Cox stepwise regression. The importance of variables was ranked using XGBoost. The predictive performance of the model was assessed by using C-index, area under the curve (AUC) of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, sensitivity and specificity. The consistency of the model was evaluated by using a calibration curve. The clinical practicality of the model was verified through decision curve analysis (DCA).
ROC curve demonstrated that all models except the non-proportional hazards and non-log linearity (NPHNLL) model, achieved AUC values above 0.7, indicating high accuracy. The calibration curve and DCA further confirmed strong predictive performance and clinical practicability.
In this study, we successfully constructed a machine learning model by combining XGBoost with Cox and generalized Cox regression models. This integrated approach accurately predicts the prognosis of children with DLBCL from multiple dimensions. These findings provide a scientific basis for accurate clinical prognosis prediction.

Body:
• Using regression analysis, we identified several independent prognostic factors for overall survival (OS) in children with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) namely age, sex, surgery, primary surgical procedure, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, systemic therapy, Ann Arbor stage and time from diagnosis to treatment.
• The incidence of DLBCL in children is increasing globally. Due to the immature immune system in children, the prognosis of DLBCL is quite different from that of adults.
• By comparing our novel model to the traditional prognostic system, we used the decision curve analysis. The results indicated that within the threshold of 0.87, the net benefit rates of the novel models exceeded those of traditional international prognostic index prognostic score.
• It can be demonstrated that the novel model has better clinical value and utility in evaluating the OS of DLBCL in children when compared to the traditional prognostic system. We could use novel models to assist clinical practitioners in predicting more accurate prognoses for children DLBCL patients.
Lymphoma is among the eight most common malignant tumors worldwide. Its incidence has been increasing annually. According to statistics from the World Health Organization, the annual growth rate of lymphoma incidence was 5% to 7% between 2000 and 2019 with over 200,000 deaths occurring each year (
Although the Cox regression model is a standard method for tumor prognosis analysis, more methods are needed to analyze the significance of prognostic factors and to conduct precision analysis of the model (
We obtained authorization to collect clinicopathological data of patients diagnosed with DLBCL between 2000 and 2019 using SEER*Stat software (version 8.4.0.1). The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (as revised in 2013). Finally, we gathered detailed clinicopathological and follow-up data from 832 patients who met the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Inclusion criteria: (I) patients with histopathological diagnosis of DLBCL; (II) under 18 years old; (III) the year of diagnosis was 2000–2019; (IV) follow-up information such as patient survival data was complete. Exclusion criteria: (I) patients older than 18 years; (II) those with unknown tumor size; (III) those with unknown tumor stage.
Lots of meaningful variables were extracted for subsequent analysis. These variables included the patient’s age, sex, Ann Arbor stage, year of diagnosis, IPI, ethnicity, B-symptoms, histological grade, surgical method, primary tumor location, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, systemic therapy, time from diagnosis to treatment, survival, cause of death and survival time. The follow-up period was extended until December 31, 2019. The primary outcome measure considered was overall survival (OS), which was defined as the interval from the time of the patient’s histopathological diagnosis until death.
The Cox PH regression model is currently the most commonly utilized semi-parametric model for conducting multivariate survival analysis. It has been widely used because it combines the advantages of both parametric and non-parametric models, which can analyze the influence of survival time for incomplete data. Survival analysis is the collective term for a series of methods dealing with the statistics of time to event and variables and is often used to study disease occurrence, outcome, recovery and death (
XGBoost is an ensemble learning algorithm based on gradient boosting and its principle is to achieve precise classification effect through iterative computation of weak classifiers (
Generalized Cox regression is an advanced predictor model that exhibits great flexibility compared to Cox regression. Cox regression employs the assumption of PH and LL (
Statistical analysis was performed using the R software (version 4.1.3). Various packages were utilized, including flexrsurv, ggpubr, rms, survival, MASS, survminer, ggplot2, survivalROC, ggforest, ggDCA, Hmisc, lattice, Formula, XGBoost, etc. Multivariate Cox regression, Generalized Cox regression and XGBoost were used to screen out the prognostic characteristic variables of children with DLBCL respectively (Cox and Generalized Cox regression used the minimum Akaike Information Criterion as the basis for variable screening. The top ten characteristic variables were used as the basis for screening of XGBoost). Cox regression was used to construct the selected prognostic factors. XGBoost ranked the importance of prognostic feature variables. Generalized Cox regression determined the non-proportional risk and non-log-linear relationship between prognostic variables and survival risk. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, C-index, sensitivity and specificity were used to determine the predictive performance of model. Calibration curve and DCA were used to determine the consistency and clinical validity of the model. The analysis indicators were 1-, 3-, and 5-year OS of the tumor. The significance level was set at α=0.05.
There were 2,230 children diagnosed with DLBCL from 2000 to 2019 obtained from the SEER database by using SEER*Stat software. The clinicopathological information mainly included patient age, race, year of diagnosis, primary tumor location, histological type, grade, Ann Arbor stage, surgical method, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, systematic treatment, time from diagnosis to treatment, IPI score, B symptoms, survival status, cause of death and survival time. The obtained patient information was screened several times according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Finally, 836 cases that met the study criteria were included, which were randomly divided into a modeling group (n=585) and a validation group (n=251) by using the “rms” package of R software at a ratio of 7:3 according to a random number table method. The related detailed clinicopathological information is shown in 
DLBCL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; SEER, Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results; IPI, international prognostic index.
To identify the key factors influencing survival in children with DLBCL, we conducted multivariate Cox stepwise regression analysis. This analysis helped us identify independent prognostic factors associated with OS. The findings revealed that Ann Arbor stages III and IV were significantly associated with poorer OS in patients aged under 18 years. Children aged under 2 years exhibited worse 3-, 5-year OS compared to those older than 2 years. In terms of treatment, patients who underwent chemotherapy or radiotherapy had a better prognosis than those who did not receive these treatments. In addition, Patients who received systemic therapy also had a more favorable prognosis. According to the multivariate Cox stepwise regression analysis, the OS of patients who only had primary tumor surgery did not gain prolonged extension. In addition, we analyzed social variables such as family income status and marital status, but they did not emerge as independent prognostic factors for OS.
To uncover intricate NLL relationships between prognostic variables and OS, we analyzed all variables using generalized Cox regression. NLL model indicated that age, surgery, chemotherapy, Ann Arbor stage, sex and radiotherapy for OS exhibited NLL relationships (P<0.05). ROC curves were employed to assess the generalized Cox regression. In the training cohort, the area under the curve (AUC) for NLL model was 0.870 [95% confidence interval (CI): 0.818, 0.892]. In the validation cohort, the AUC for NLL was 0.869 (95% CI: 0.830, 0.872). The NPH model suggested that age, Ann Arbor stage, radiotherapy and chemotherapy for OS demonstrated NPH relationships (P<0.05). We showed in detail the NLL and NPH relationships between age and OS (
Non-proportional hazard relationships between age and overall survival. M, male; F, female.
Non-log linearity relationships between age and overall survival. M, male; F, female.
XGBoost analysis revealed the top 10 characteristic variables associated with OS in children with DLBCL. These prognostic factors were ranked based on their importance: age, systemic therapy, Ann Arbor stage, laterality, radiation type, stage, surgery type, chemotherapy, radiation, and time from diagnosis to treatment (
Feature importance evaluation of extreme gradient boosting model.
The variables with P<0.05 in the multivariate Cox regression were incorporated into nomogram (
Nomogram for predicting overall survival.
Calibration curve for 1-year overall survival in the training cohort.
Calibration curve for 3-year overall survival in the training cohort.
Calibration curve for 5-year overall survival in the training cohort
Calibration curve for 1-year overall survival in the validation cohort.
Calibration curve for 3-year overall survival in the validation cohort.
Calibration curve for 5-year overall survival in the validation cohort.
Decision curve analysis of the training cohort. IPI, international prognostic index; Nomo, nomogram.
Decision curve analysis of the validation cohort. IPI, international prognostic index; Nomo, nomogram.
NPH, non-proportional hazards; NLL, non-log linearity; NPHNLL, non-proportional hazards and non-log linearity; XGBoost, extreme gradient boosting; AUC, area under curve.
Although children with DLBCL are rare, their incidence is gradually increasing (
Previous studies showed that sex, age, stage, chemotherapy, B symptoms and large mass size were influencing factors for the prognosis of children with DLBCL (
In addition, we constructed a novel predictive nomogram and validated it with a 251 patients internal validation cohort. Our findings revealed that patients’ characteristics, such as age, sex, Ann Arbor stage, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, systemic therapy, and time from diagnosis to treatment were associated with prognosis. Additionally, this nomogram performed excellently as assessed by the calibration curve and AUC. Compared to the IPI scoring system, the calibration curve of the nomogram for predicting OS was more accurate both in the training and validation sets. Moreover, the AUC values of the nomogram for predicting 3- and 5-year OS were higher, providing clinicians with a more accurate prediction of individual patients. Furthermore, the DCA curve was used to identify high-risk patients to intervene while low-risk patients to avoid unnecessary intervention (
In recent years, extensive retrospective studies have indicated that elderly patients are at high risk for DLBCL (
So far, XGBoost model has been widely utilized in the cancer field for survival analysis (
Despite several promising findings, there are several limitations in our research. Firstly, the data from the SEER database were derived from retrospective studies, which might introduce selection bias and information bias. Secondly, there were missing data regarding chemotherapy regimens of patients and doses. As a result, we were unable to investigate the impact of specific chemotherapy regimens on OS of patients.
We constructed three novel models to predict DLBCL in children by using a large set of DLBCL samples from SEER database and an analysis of commonly used clinical indicators. These high-precision models effectively predict the intricate relationships between variables and survival risk in children with DLBCL. Our research aims to assist clinical practitioners in predicting more accurate prognoses for children DLBCL patients, enabling individual precision treatment and offering guidance for the management of patients.
The article’s supplementary files as
Available at 